---
title: FilterConsensusReads
---

# FilterConsensusReads

## Overview
**Group:** Unique Molecular Identifiers (UMIs)

Filters consensus reads generated by _CallMolecularConsensusReads_ or _CallDuplexConsensusReads_.
Two kinds of filtering are performed:

  1. Masking/filtering of individual bases in reads
  2. Filtering out of reads (i.e. not writing them to the output file)

Base-level filtering/masking is only applied if per-base tags are present (see _CallDuplexConsensusReads_ and
_CallMolecularConsensusReads_ for descriptions of these tags). Read-level filtering is always applied.  When
filtering reads, secondary alignments and supplementary records may be removed independently if they fail
one or more filters; if either R1 or R2 primary alignments fail a filter then all records for the template
will be filtered out.

The filters applied are as follows:

  1. Reads with fewer than min-reads contributing reads are filtered out
  2. Reads with an average consensus error rate higher than max-read-error-rate are filtered out
  3. Reads with mean base quality of the consensus read, prior to any masking, less than min-mean-base-quality
     are filtered out (if specified)
  4. Bases with quality scores below min-base-quality are masked to Ns
  5. Bases with fewer than min-reads contributing raw reads are masked to Ns
  6. Bases with a consensus error rate (defined as the fraction of contributing reads that voted for a different
     base than the consensus call) higher than max-base-error-rate are masked to Ns
  7. For duplex reads, if require-single-strand-agreement is provided, masks to Ns any bases where the base was
     observed in both single-strand consensus reads and the two reads did not agree
  8. Reads with a proportion of Ns higher than max-no-call-fraction *after* per-base filtering are filtered out

When filtering _single-umi consensus_ reads generated by _CallMolecularConsensusReads_ a single value each
should be supplied for `--min-reads`, `--max-read-error-rate`, and `--max-base-error-rate`.

When filtering duplex consensus reads generated by _CallDuplexConsensusReads_ each of the three parameters
may independently take 1-3 values. For example:

```
FilterConsensusReads ... --min-reads 10 5 3 --max-base-error-rate 0.1
```

In each case if fewer than three values are supplied, the last value is repeated (i.e. `80 40` -> `80 40 40`
and `0.1` -> `0.1 0.1 0.1`.  The first value applies to the final consensus read, the second value to one
single-strand consensus, and the last value to the other single-strand consensus. It is required that if
values two and three differ, the _more stringent value comes earlier_.

In order to correctly filter reads in or out by template, if the input BAM is not `queryname` sorted or
grouped it will be sorted into queryname order.  The resulting records are `coordinate` sorted to efficiently
correct the `NM`, `UQ` and `MD` tags, and the output BAM is always written in coordinate order.

The `--reverse-tags-per-base` option controls whether per-base tags should be reversed before being used on reads
marked as being mapped to the negative strand.  This is necessary if the reads have been mapped and the
bases/quals reversed but the consensus tags have not.  If true, the tags written to the output BAM will be
reversed where necessary in order to line up with the bases and quals.

## Arguments

|Name|Flag|Type|Description|Required?|Max Values|Default Value(s)|
|----|----|----|-----------|---------|----------|----------------|
|input|i|PathToBam|The input SAM or BAM file of consensus reads.|Required|1||
|output|o|PathToBam|Output SAM or BAM file.|Required|1||
|ref|r|PathToFasta|Reference fasta file.|Required|1||
|reverse-per-base-tags|R|Boolean|Reverse [complement] per base tags on reverse strand reads.|Optional|1|false|
|min-reads|M|Int|The minimum number of reads supporting a consensus base/read.|Required|3||
|max-read-error-rate|E|Double|The maximum raw-read error rate across the entire consensus read.|Required|3|0.025|
|max-base-error-rate|e|Double|The maximum error rate for a single consensus base.|Required|3|0.1|
|min-base-quality|N|PhredScore|Mask (make `N`) consensus bases with quality less than this threshold.|Required|1||
|max-no-call-fraction|n|Double|Maximum fraction of no-calls in the read after filtering.|Optional|1|0.2|
|min-mean-base-quality|q|PhredScore|The minimum mean base quality across the consensus read.|Optional|1||
|require-single-strand-agreement|s|Boolean|Mask (make `N`) consensus bases where the AB and BA consensus reads disagree (for duplex-sequencing only).|Optional|1|false|

